TR description in optimization tutorial (#2181)
pymor/pymor: docs/source/tutorial_optimization.md

and enhance the surrogate models when we either are close to the boundary of the trust-region
or when the model confidence decreases such that we require more data.
The local surrogates are required to be accurate only locally which avoids the construction
of a globally sensible ROM. These local surrogates are built using FOM solutions and gradients.
A speedup is obtained if many of the optimization steps based on FOM evaluations can be replaced
by much cheaper iterations of the ROM and only a few FOM computations are required to build the
reduced models.

The trust-region algorithm thus consists of one outer loop and many inner loops.
The outer loop iterates over the global parameter space and constructs local trust-regions along with their corresponding
surrogates, whereas the inner loops use a modified version of the projected BFGS to solve
the local problems. For a fixed parameter in the outer iteration {math}`\mu` and the current
surrogate model {math}`J_r`, the local problems can be written as

```{math}
\min_{\mu + s \in \Delta} J_r(u_{\mu + s}, \mu + s).  \tag{$\hat{P}_r$}
```

In the formulation of ({math}`\hat{P}_r`), {math}`\Delta \subseteq \mathcal{P}` is the

> trust-region with tolerance {math}`\tau > 0` for an error estimator {math}`e_r` of our choice

Reviewer: ```suggestion
trust-region with tolerance {math}`\tau > 0` for an error estimator {math}`e_r` of our choice,
```

in which the updated parameter {math}`\mu + s` satisfies

```{math}
e_r(\mu + s) < \tau.
```

In metric settings such as with the {math}`2`-norm in parameter space, these trust-regions

> correspond to open balls of radius {math}`\tau`. However, using error estimators from model
> reduction in this tutorial's setting creates much more complex shapes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
correspond to open balls of radius {math}`\tau`. However, using model reduction error estimators as in this tutorial, creates much more complex shapes.
```

The sketch below shows an exemplary optimization path with inner and outer iterations and the
respective trust-regions.

```{image} trust_region_plot.png
:alt: Sketch of the optimization path of a trust-region method

> :width: 100%

Reviewer: That's too wide. See rendered output.

```

The adaptive component of this algorithm is the choice of the trust-radius and the enrichment.
If a local optimization in an inner loop fails, we retry the surrogate problem with a
smaller trust-region, thus limiting the trustworthiness of the current model.
In contrast, when we quickly converge close to the boundary of the trust-region, it is a
reasonable assumption that the globally optimal parameter is outside of the trust-region

> and thus we stop the inner iteration. After computing an inner solution we then have the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and, thus, we stop the inner iteration. After computing an inner solution we then have the
```

option to keep the current surrogate model, enlarge the trust-radius of the local model
or further enrich it by adding the FOM solution snapshot at the current local optimum.
In this sense, the adaptive trust-region algorithm can reduce the number of FOM evaluations

> by estimating if the current surrogate is trustworthy enough to increase the trust-radius

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by estimating whether the current surrogate is trustworthy enough to increase the trust-radius
```

> and only enrich the model if the estimated quality is no longer sufficient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and only enriching the model if the estimated quality is no longer sufficient.
```

The algorithm described above can be executed as follows.

```{code-cell}
from pymor.algorithms.tr import coercive_rb_trust_region
from pymor.parameters.functionals import MinThetaParameterFunctional

coercivity_estimator = MinThetaParameterFunctional(fom.operator.coefficients, mu_bar)
pdeopt_reductor = CoerciveRBReductor(
    fom, product=fom.energy_product, coercivity_estimator=coercivity_estimator)

tic = perf_counter()
tr_mu, tr_minimization_data = coercive_rb_trust_region(pdeopt_reductor, parameter_space=parameter_space,
                                                       initial_guess=np.array(initial_guess))
toc = perf_counter()

tr_minimization_data['time'] = toc - tic
tr_output = fom.output(tr_mu)[0, 0]
```

Now, we only need {math}`4` enrichments and end up with an approximation
error of about `1e-06` which is comparable to the result obtained from the

> previous methods. Unfortunately, the trust-region method takes longer because of

Reviewer: In the rendered documentation, the TR algorithm is the fastest. Otherwise, this should be phrased more positively.

the overhead of ROM evaluations and line searches performed in the BFGS step.
To conclude, we once again compare all methods that we have discussed in this notebook.

```{code-cell}
from pymordemos.trust_region import report as tr_report
reference_fun = fom_objective_functional(reference_mu)

print('FOM with finite differences')
report(fom_result, reference_minimization_data, reference_mu)

print('\nFOM with gradient')
report(opt_fom_result, opt_fom_minimization_data, reference_mu)

tr_report(tr_mu, tr_output, reference_mu, reference_fun, tr_minimization_data,
    parameter_space.parameters.parse, descriptor=' of optimization with adaptive ROM model and TR method')
```

> It is apparent that for this example no drastic changes occur when using the different

Reviewer: So we don't need real gradients in the first place? When can we expect to need them?

methods. Importantly, the TR method is noticeably faster than the FOM-based methods.

> It is expected that the for problems of larger scale the speedup is even more pronounced.

Reviewer: 'expected' -> we are unsure?

Crucially, the number of necessary FOM evaluations in the trust-region method is smaller
than for the other methods because we use the information in the local surrogates more efficiently.

```{code-cell}
:tags: [remove-cell]

subproblem_data = tr_minimization_data['subproblem_data']

assert tr_minimization_data['fom_evaluations'] == 7
assert tr_minimization_data['rom_evaluations'] == 224
assert tr_minimization_data['enrichments'] == 4
assert sum([subproblem_data[i]['iterations'] for i in range(len(subproblem_data))]) == 18
assert sum(np.concatenate([subproblem_data[i]['line_search_iterations'] for i in range(len(subproblem_data))])) == 114
```

Note: A more extensive showcase of the trust-region methods is implemented
in the respective demo {mod}`~pymordemos.trust_region`.

## Conclusion and some general words about MOR methods for optimization

In this tutorial we have seen how pyMOR can be used to speedup the optimizer
for PDE-constrained optimization problems.

> Moreover, we focused on the lack of overall efficiency of standard RB methods.

Reviewer: We haven't really seen that global RB methods are not competitive.

> We have therefore seen a way to efficiently use local surrogate models in a trust-region

Reviewer: 'we have seen a way' sounds very strange.

algorithm to reduce the number of FOM evaluations required during optimization.

> In this tutorial we have only covered a few basic approaches to combine model

Reviewer: I wouldn't call the TR-algorithm basic.

is even more pronounced.
Crucially, the number of necessary FOM evaluations in the trust-region method is smaller
than for the other methods because we use the information in the local surrogates more efficiently.

```{code-cell}
:tags: [remove-cell]

subproblem_data = tr_minimization_data['subproblem_data']

assert tr_minimization_data['fom_evaluations'] == 7
assert tr_minimization_data['rom_evaluations'] == 224
assert tr_minimization_data['enrichments'] == 4
assert sum([subproblem_data[i]['iterations'] for i in range(len(subproblem_data))]) == 18
assert sum(np.concatenate([subproblem_data[i]['line_search_iterations'] for i in range(len(subproblem_data))])) == 114
```

Note: A more extensive showcase of the trust-region methods is implemented
in the respective demo {mod}`~pymordemos.trust_region`.

## Conclusion and some general words about MOR methods for optimization

In this tutorial we have seen how pyMOR can be used to speedup the optimizer
for PDE-constrained optimization problems.
The trust-region algorithm shown here is able to efficiently use local surrogate
models to reduce the number of FOM evaluations required during optimization.

> In this tutorial we have only covered a few approaches to combine model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have only covered a few approaches to combine model
```
Previous paragraph already starts with 'In this tutorial'.

PDE-constrained optimization problems we refer to
[YM13](<https://epubs.siam.org/doi/abs/10.1137/120869171>),
[QGVW17](<https://epubs.siam.org/doi/abs/10.1137/16M1081981>) and

> [KMSOV20](<https://www.esaim-m2an.org/articles/m2an/abs/2021/04/m2an200123/m2an200123.html>)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[KMSOV20](<https://www.esaim-m2an.org/articles/m2an/abs/2021/04/m2an200123/m2an200123.html>),
```

assert opt_along_path_adaptively_minimization_data['enrichments'] == 4
```

## Adaptive trust-region optimization

Moreover, we can use trust-region methods to extend the adaptive enrichment with

> respect to the underlying error estimator.

Reviewer 2: Although this is true for the TR method, it is also already true for the method that has been discussed in the former section. I would rather tend to remove the former method and maybe even the one before (see the main comment of the review).

> In the trust-region method, we replace the global problem with local surrogates,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the trust-region method, we iteratively replace the global problem with local surrogates,
```

compute local solutions to these surrogate problems, and enhance the surrogate models

> when we either are close to the border of the trust-region or when the model confidence

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
when we either are close to the boundary of the trust-region or when the model confidence
```

decreases such that we require more data.

> In effect, this creates two loops: the outer iterates over global parameter space and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thus, the TR consists of one outer loop and many inner loops. The outer loop iterates over global parameter space and
```

constructs local trust-regions along with their corresponding surrogates, whereas the

> inner solves the local problems with BFGS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
inner loops use a modified version of the projected BFGS to solve the local problems.
```

For a fixed parameter in the outer iteration {math}`\mu` and the current surrogate model

> {math}`J_r`, this approach takes the shape

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{math}`J_r`, the local problems can be written as
```

```{math}
\min_{\mu + s \in \Delta} J_r(u_{\mu + s}, \mu + s),  \tag{\hat{P}_r}.
```

In the formulation of ({math}`\hat{P}_r`), {math}`\Delta \subseteq \mathcal{P}` is the
trust-region with tolerance {math}`\tau > 0` for an error estimator of our choice {math}`e_r`
in which the updated parameter {math}`\mu + s` satisfies

```{math}
e_r(\mu + s) < \tau.
```

In metric settings such as with the {math}`2`-norm, these trust-regions correspond to

> open balls of radius {math}`\tau`, however the typical estimators in this tutorial's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
open balls of radius {math}`\tau`, however using model reduction estimators as in this tutorial's
```

> setting create much more complex shapes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
setting creates much more complex shapes.
```

The adaptive component of this algorithm is the choice of the trust-radius and the enrichment.

> If a local optimization in the inner loop fails, we retry the surrogate problem with a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a local optimization in an inner loop fails, we retry the surrogate problem with a
```

> smaller trust-region, thus limiting the use of the current model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
smaller trust-region, thus limiting the trustworthiness of the current model.
```

In contrast, when we quickly converge close to the boundary of the trust-region, it is a

> reasonable assumption that the globally optimal parameter is outside of the current region,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
reasonable assumption that the globally optimal parameter is outside of the current trust-region and thus we stop the inner iteration.
```

therefore allowing us to enlarge the radius to include more parameter options in the

> inner optimization problem.

Reviewer 2: I do not understand this sentence, to be honest. Do you mean that we enlarge the radius by enrichment or you mean the delta that can be enlarged for the next inner loop?

After computing an inner solution we then have the option to keep the current surrogate
model or enrich it by adding the solution snapshot of the current local optimum.
In this sense, the adaptive trust-region algorithm resembles the adaptive path

> enrichment described above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
enrichment described above.

The above-described algorithm can be executed as follows.
```

```{code-cell}
from pymor.algorithms.tr import coercive_rb_trust_region

pdeopt_reductor = CoerciveRBReductor(
    fom, product=fom.energy_product, coercivity_estimator=coercivity_estimator)

tic = perf_counter()
tr_mu, tr_data = coercive_rb_trust_region(pdeopt_reductor, parameter_space=parameter_space,
                                            initial_guess=np.array(initial_guess))
toc = perf_counter()

tr_data['time'] = toc - tic
tr_output = fom.output(tr_mu)[0, 0]
```

> Again, we only need {math}`4` enrichments and ended up with an approximation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Again, we only need {math}`4` enrichments and end up with an approximation
```

error of about `1e-06` which is comparable to the result obtained from adaptive
enrichment. Unfortunately, the trust-region method takes longer because of

> the overhead of ROM evaluations and line searches performed in the BFGS step.

Reviewer 2: This again suggests that we should not stick with the former methods as they heavily depend on the tolerances and a certified method should anyway be much more preferred to be used.

> To conclude, we once again compare all methods that we have discussed in this notebook.

Reviewer 2: In this case, only the report for the TR method is shown?

```{code-cell}
from pymordemos.trust_region import report as tr_report

tr_report(tr_mu, tr_output, reference_mu, fom_objective_functional(reference_mu), tr_data,
        parameter_space.parameters.parse, descriptor=' of optimization with adaptive ROM model and TR method')
```

```{code-cell}
:tags: [remove-cell]

subproblem_data = tr_data['subproblem_data']

assert tr_data['fom_evaluations'] == 7
assert tr_data['rom_evaluations'] == 224
assert tr_data['enrichments'] == 4
assert sum([subproblem_data[i]['iterations'] for i in range(len(subproblem_data))]) == 18
assert sum(np.concatenate([subproblem_data[i]['line_search_iterations'] for i in range(len(subproblem_data))])) == 114
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I think we are lacking a bit more interpretation of the results.

implementation is available as supplementary material.

> 

Reviewer 2: I guess this part needs to be updated. see above.
